---
layout: post
title:  "Review"
date:   2015-09-07
tags: [penn, philadelphia]
---

*Becoming Penn: The Pragmatic American University, 1950-2000.*  
By John L. Puckett and Mark Frazier Lloyd,  
464 pp. University of Pennsylvania Press. \$49.95.

<div>&nbsp;</div>

Somewhere between historical journalism (an energetic, tell-all style)
and journalistic history (countless Daily
Pennsylvanian and Inquirer clippings) is a love letter by two Penn
faculty members admitting that Quaker loyalty can be complicated but
never boring. John Puckett and Mark Frazier Lloyd’s well-researched
volume chooses to frame Penn’s development as a series of narratives,
with the university’s presidents as their protagonists.

The structure is sensible, and it provides provocative section titles:
“The Builder” (Gaylord Harnwell, 1953–70); “The Visionary” (Marvin
Meyerson, 1970–81); “The Conciliator” (Sheldon Hackney, 1981–93); and
“The Implementer” (Judith Rodin, 1994–2004). And who else could play the
lead? The institution *per se* is an impersonal actor, and even
long-lived faculty members lack influence beyond the occasional or
anecdotal—Alan Kors appears only on cue as foil, accessory, or
polemicist. The undergraduates themselves are far from movers and
shakers. In the authors’ view, a four-year turnover precludes any impact
more substantial than short-lived sit-ins, insensitive acts, or topical
rewrites of the ‘Port Huron Statement.’ The resulting chapters thus
focus deeply on the university’s heads of estate: backgrounds, goals,
good intentions, foibles, and fundraising. It makes for a good story,
but also a misleading one.

While Penn may be at the economic center of West Philadelphia, and
College Hall at the center of Penn, the president’s role is more
complementary than commanding. It is true that specific purchases,
developments, and loan forgiveness programs can have large effects on
small areas, such as the demographic makeup of the Penn Alexander
School’s catchment \[p. 267\]. Still, macroeconomic trends in the city
more or less mirrored those of the nation. Undeveloped, empty lots
spotted West Philly in the 1970s, making it look a lot like
contemporaneous Harlem or Brooklyn. Rising crime rates in the 1980s and
early nineties gave way to falling rates in the late nineties and early
2000s, neatly (but not causally) coinciding with Rodin’s and Clinton’s
respective terms in presidential offices. Job-training programs through
manufacturing unions, finally inclusive of racial minorities, were a
decade too late for global markets. Since the late nineties, urban real
estate prices have skyrocketed nationally, even after bubble-bursting in \2007. Penn’s actions still matter, of course—that is decidedly true—but its case is more complicated than paternalistic benefactor or self-serving land-grabber.

Of course, the history of West Philadelphia is fascinating, and Puckett
and Lloyd do well to make it so. The geographic expansion of an Ivy
League university—as all universities expanded in the postwar years—was
coterminous with ‘Black Bottom,’ a legally zoned, post-segregation,
wealthy suburb turned densely packed neighborhood on the receiving end
of white flight, revitalization efforts, and city expansion—as,
too, all cities expanded in the postwar years. Penn posted security
guards at the fringes of campus, for the short-term safety of its
members. Now, the authors report, Penn must open its campus to local
communities, for the long-term wellbeing of its own. Somewhat
charmingly, somewhat sickeningly, Penn contradicts itself, containing
multitudes.

Learning about the past fifty years of Penn’s residence in West Philly
is at once powerful and proverbial: The more things change, the more
they stay the same. It is the ‘flashback’ episode of a beloved TV show;
the audience can finally put faces to the nameplates, backstories to the
stories of high-rise apartment complexes. The row over Sansom-Walnut
rows west of 34th street? Knowledgeable readers can anticipate the
transmogrification of Cy’s Penn Luncheonette into a Starbucksbedecked
office building \[p. 232\] with the neat satisfaction of a franchise
prequel. Even then, *Becoming Penn* offers the occasional jolt. Areas
seemingly outside the ‘Penn bubble,’ such as Baltimore Avenue’s small
business conclave around 50th street, bear the university’s indelible
mark nevertheless \[p. 244–5\].

For many, though, the infrastructural changes of West Philadelphia go
beyond mere thought experiments. Regardless of Penn’s culpability,
however accurate, for its gentrifying presence (‘Penntrification,’ as
one long-time resident quipped) or the unintended consequences of urban
renewal and re-renewal, the repercussions are felt beyond University
City \[p. 268\].

Perhaps all a current student can offer is a good-faith effort to
comprehend the forces at work in a community. Thanks to Puckett and
Lloyd’s weighty contribution, protagonists aside, Penn’s immediate
future stands in the vivid relief of its recent past. Franklin may have
been intrigued, if not entirely proud, that the institution bearing his
legacy now offers to its students a nuanced case study, close to home.

<p>&nbsp;</p>
<p class="postscript">
Originally written for Dr. Ira Harkavy&#8217;s fall 2015 course (and Collaborative Action Seminar), &lsquo;Urban-University Community Relations.&rsquo; Revised 1 Jun 17.
</p>
