---
layout: post
title: "The Eumenides: Dramaturgical Note"
date: 2016-03-24
tags: [classics, penn, theatre]
---

Dramaturgical note for *The Eumenides* program, Theater Arts Dept., Spring 2016.

Aeschylus’ *Oresteia* is the only complete narrative trilogy carried
down to us from ancient Greece. Actors performed all three plays in a
single festival in 458 BCE, and for it the father of tragedy won top
prize. In the first play, Agamemnon dies at the hands of his estranged
wife, Clytemnestra, who herself dies by the vengeful blade of their son
Orestes in the second. Chased now by the Furies (euphemistically
Eumenides, “Kindly Ones”) who want blood for matricidal blood, Orestes
takes refuge at the Temple of Apollo.

And yet, *The Eumenides* is a strange breed of tragedy; it ends with
everyone still on his feet. The conclusion is a legal reform, like one
many Athenians underwent in the sixth century. But the *Oresteia* begins
with the family of Agamemnon, who returns from Troy in the 12th
century BCE&mdash;the preliterate, honor-driven world of Homer. And the
Furies, borrowing attributes of every female death-spirit in the Greek
imagination, stretch back even further to the shadows of primordial
creation and “eye-for-an-eye” justice. The old gods vie against the new
Olympians, Apollo and Athena. Orestes hails from an Age of Heroes, but
the playwright ties his fate to the judicial development at the very
start of Athens’ golden age. In this way Aeschylus solves two myths in
the guise of one: the *miasma* of Orestes’ family tree and the origin of
Athenians’ civic identity.

The difference in era cannot be overstated, as well as the sheer
inventiveness of molding together disparate mythologies. Consider:
Lear’s daughter Cordelia is suddenly saved, emphasizing the importance
of equitable treatment and resulting in proportional voting scheme for
the British Parliament; or Judah Loew ben Bezalel publicizes the Golem’s
hidden message, inspiring the Czechs of Prague to demand constitutional
reform in a Velvet Revolution.

The play, unique in the ancient Greek canon, presents a reflective
opportunity for us moderns as well. We too are obsessed with the rises
and (especially) falls of larger-than-life political families.
Grassroots movements around the country call for a return of democratic
principles to a criminal-justice system overwhelmed by prison
overpopulation, arbitrary mandatory-minimum sentencing, and private
(corporate) interests. Above all, *The Eumenides* is a play about social
progress. Orestes, once a suppliant at the stone of Zeus’ childhood
salvation—in our production, a cast replica of the Code of
Hammurabi—finds absolution in literature’s first trial-by-jury.
Aeschylus, not naïve about the collateral damage of history’s forward
motion, still contends that it will not end in tragedy.

And what better place to stage the arc of human progress than the Penn
Museum, with its visible, corporeal history? The Chinese Rotunda and
Upper Egypt gallery might not speak to the materiel of Orestes’ past,
but all are equally part of our own.
