---
layout: post
title: "SAC End-of-Year Press Release"
date: 2016-04-27
tags: [penn]
---

(Circulated at the end of the 2015-16 academic year, during which I had the pleasure to serve as  Chair of the Student Activities Council.)

As in every year, SAC was excited to organize and host both the **Fall
and Spring Activities Fairs**, with some 450 and 200 groups
participating, respectively. A long-term SAC project is improving
ease-of-access for new freshmen unfamiliar with Penn’s many clubs, both
at our activities fairs and also via the online portal G.O. Penn.

In fall 2015 we introduced a Canvas module and quiz to
streamline **Treasurer Training**, with completion counting as one GBM
attendance. It’s still in early stages but provides proof-of-concept for
a more thorough, universal system in upcoming years. There is some
prerequisite knowledge that treasurers need in order to
request SAC budgets, process reimbursements, and access other funding
resources on campus. This model ensures that fewer groups fall through
the cracks of complicated University systems.

Fall 2015 also saw the application of some forty-four (44) **new student
organizations** for SAC recognition, of which twenty-five (25) were
approved by the general body at December’s meeting.

In spring 2016, we conducted one of the biggest **Budget &
Allocation** processes ever, reviewing the budget requests of 162 groups
and granting \$745,249 of a total requested \$1.35 million. This leaves
plenty of “wiggle room” for contingency requests next year.

A benefit of the process was a productive review and several
clarifications of **SAC’s funding guidelines**, which Exec updated in
accordance with present requests, past funding, and affected
organizations’ input. One tangible change was the development of
consistent standards for theatre groups’ Production funding, recognizing
that all seven groups have similar expenses, needs, and missions.

We have also been attempting a rollout of **proactive funding for
performance space** to better align with our mission and control
expenses, by empowering individual groups to understand venue costs and
better communicate with Perelman Quad or Annenberg. This requires a good
deal of coordination between SAC and PAC Exec, helped by the many
performing-arts-fluent members of SAC’s current board. In the longer
term, SAC has also met with University administrators to discuss
alternative rehearsal and performance spaces on campus, an initiative we
are excited to continue with new UA Treasurer (and SAC Exec member)
Michelle Xu.

In broader terms, one of my missions as chair has been to make SAC Exec
a more **transparent, responsive, and welcoming space** for groups on
campus, SAC-funded or not, tackling questions that range from the
mundanely logistical to ones about the higher purpose of student funding
at a private University. We are always available by email, and I welcome
any constructive feedback.
